
			NMI.

	At power on  time, the non  maskable interrupt (NMI)  inot the 80286
is masked off.

MASK ON :  Write to I/O address 70h, with data bit 7 equal to a logic 0.
MASK OFF : Write to I/O address 70h, with data bit 7 equal to a logic 1.

	At the end of POST the system sets the NMI mask on ( NMI enable ).

	To determine the location of the failing adapter, write to any
memory location within a given adapter. If parity checks was from that
adapter, -IO CH CK will be reset to inactive.


			Math Coprocessor

	mov	al,0
	out 	0f1h,al	; Reset 80286

	mov	al,0
	out 	0f0h,al	; Clear the latched Math Coprocessor '-busy' signal


		Keyboard Status  Register.

	The status register  is an 8-bit  read-only register at  I/O address
64h. It has information about the state of the keyboard controller 8042.  It
may be read at any time.

Bit 7 :  Parity Error -  A 0 indicated  the last byte  of data received from
	keyboard  hadd  odd  parity.  A  1  indicated the last byte had even
	parity. The keyboard should send data whith odd parity.

Bit 6 : Receive Time-Out - A  1 indicated that a transmition was started  by
	the  keyboard  but  did  not  finish  within  the programmed receive
	time-out delay.

Bit 5 : Transmit Time-Out - A 1 indicated that a transmition started by  the
	keyboard  controller  was  not  properly  completed. If the transmit
	byte was not clocked out  within the specified timelimit, this  will
	be the only error.

Bit 4 : Inhibit Switch - This bit is updated whenever data is placed in  the
	keyboard controler's output  buffer. It reflects  the states of  the
	keyboard-inhibit switch. A 0 indicates the keyboard is inhibited.

Bit 3 : Command  /  Data  -  The   keyboard  controler's input buffer may be
	addressed as either  I/O addres 60h  or 64h. Address  60h is defined
	as the data port,  abd address 64h is  defined as the command  port.
	Writing to address 64h sets this  bits to 1; writing to address  60h
	sets this bit  to 0. The  controller uses this  bit to determine  if
	the byte  is its  input buffer  should be  interpreted as  a command
	byte or a data byte.

Bit 2 : System Flag - This flag is monitored by the system during the  reset
	routing. If it  is a 0,  the reset was  caused by a  power on.   The
	controler sets this bit to  0 at power on and  it is set to 1  after
	succesful self  test.   This bit  can be  changed by  writing to the
	system flag bit in the command byte ( 64h ).

Bit 1 :  Input Buffer Full  - A 0  indicated that the  keyboard controller's
	input buffer  ( I/O  address 60h  or 64h  ) is  empty. A 1 indicated
	that data has  been written into  the buffer but  the controller has
	not read the data . When the controller read the input buffer,  this
	bit will be return to 0.

Bit 0  : Output  Buffer Full  - A  0 indicated  that the keyboard controller
	output buffer  has no  data. A  1 indicated  that the controller has
	placed  data  into  its  output  buffer  but the system not read the
	data. When  the system  reads the  output buffer  (I/O addres  60h),
	this bit will return to a 0.


		Keyboard Controller Commands ( 64h )

20  Read  Keyboard  Controller's  Command  Byte  -  The controller sends its
    cuurent command byte to its output buffer (60h).

60  Write  Keyboard  Controller's  Command  Byte  -  The  next byte of  data
    written to  I/O  address  60h   is  placed  in the controller's  command
    byte. Bit definition of the command byte are as follows:

    Bit 7 Reaerved -Should be written as a 0

    Bit 6  IBM PC  Comatibility Mode  - Writing  a 1  to this bit causes the
	  controller to convert  the scan codes  received from the  keyboard
	  to those used by  the IBM PC.   This includes converting a  2-byte
	  break sequence to the 1-byte IBM PC format.

    Bit 5 IBM PC Mode  - Writing a 1 to  this bit programms the keyboard  to
	  support  the  IBM  PC  keyboard   interface.  In  this  mode   the
	  controller does not check parity or convert scan codes.

    Bit 4  Disable Keyboard  - Writing  1 to  this bit  disable the keyboard
	  interface by  driving the  'clock' line  low. Data  is not sent or
	  received.

    Bit 3 Inhibit Overrid  - Writing a 1  to this bit disables  the keyboard
	  inhibit function.

    Bit 2 System  Flag  - The  value written  to this  bit is  placed in the
	  system flsg bit of the controller's status register.

    Bit 1 Reserved - Should be written as a 0.

    Bit 0 Enable  Output-Buffer-Full  Interrupt -  Writing a  1 to  this bit
	  causes  the  controller  to  generate  an intterupt when it places
	  data into its output buffer.

AAh Self-Test - This commands  the controller to perform internal  diagnosic
    tests.  A  hex  55  is  plased  in  the  output  buffer if no errors are
    detected.

ABh Interface   Test  -  This  command  the controller to test the 'keyboard
    data' lines. The test result is placed in the output buffer as follows:

    00 No error detected.
    01 The 'keyboard clock' line is stuck low.
    02 The 'keyboard clock' line is stuck high.
    03 The 'keyboard data' line is stuck low.
    04 The 'keyboard data' line is stuck high.

ACh Diagnostic Dump  - Sends 16  bytes of the  controller's RAM the  current
    state if the  input port, the  curent stae of  the output port,  and the
    controller's programm status word to the system.

ADh Disable Keyboard Feature - This commands send bit 4 of the  controller's
    commnds byte.  This disables  tje keyboard  interface by  diriving clock
    line low. Data will not be sent or received.

AEh Enable  Keyboard Interface  - This  command clear  bit 4  of the command
    byte, which release the keyboard interface.

C0h Read Input Port  - This commands the  controller to read its  input port
    and place the  data in its  output buffer. This  command should be  used
    only if the output buffer is empty.

D0h  Read  Outpu  Port  -  This  commands  caused the controller to read its
    output  port  and  place  the  data  in  its output buffer. This command
    should be used only if the output buffer is empty.

D1h Write Output Port - The next byte of data written to I/O address 60h  is
    places in the controller's output port.

    NOTE :  Bit 0  of the  controller's output  port is  connected to System
	   Reset. This bit should  not be written low  as it will reset  the
	   microprocessor.

E0h Read Test Input  - This command cause  the cotroller to read  its T0 and
    T1  inputs.  This  data  is  placed  in  the  output  buffer. Data bit 0
    represents T0, and dat bit 2 represents T1.

F0h - FFh Pulse  Output port - Bits  0 through 3 of  the controller's output
	  port may be  pulsed low for  approximately 6 microsecunds.  Bits 0
	  through 3 of this command indicate which bits are to be pulsed.  A
	  0 indicates that the bit should  be pulsed, and a 1 indicates  the
	  bit should not be modified.

I/O Ports

	The keyboard controller  has two I/O  ports, one assigned  for input
and other for output. Two test input are used by the controller to read  the
state of the keyboard's 'clock'(T0) and 'data' (T1).

	The following figures show bit definitions for the input and  output
ports, and the test-input.

	Input-Port Bit Definition

Bit 7  Keyboard inhibit switch
	0 = Keyboard inhibit
	1 = Keyboard not inhibit
Bit 6  Display switch - Primary display attached to:
	0 = Color/Graphics adapter
	1 = Monochrome adapter
Bit 5  Manufacturing jumper
	0 = Manufacturing jumper installed
	1 = Jumper not installed
Bit 4  RAM on the system board
	0 = Enable 512K of system board RAM
	0 = Enable 256K of system board RAM
Bit 3  Reserved
Bit 2  Reserved
Bit 1  Reserved
Bit 0  Reserved


		Output-Port Bit Definition

Bit 7  Keyboard data (output)
Bit 6  Keyboard clock (output)
Bit 5  Input buffer empty
Bit 4  Output buffer full
Bit 3  Reserved
Bit 2  Reserved
Bit 1  Gate A20
Bit 0  System Reset

		Test-Input Bit Definition

T1   Keyboard data (input)
T0   Keyboard clock (input)



