Harddisks, Partitioning and Booting

Thomas Kjoernes
20th September 1999 





Introduction



Finally, after a years time, I've updated this article. Still, there is no fancy contents part in this document. I want to keep this writing as one length uninterrupted piece of text.



- Addressing
- CHS/LBA translation, w/ASM source..
- BIOS disk interface, INT13 and Extended INT13
- Harddisks and the Partition Table, w/ASM source.



I have done my best to keep the information as accurate and up-to-date as possible. Grammar and spelling has also been checked, but since English is not my native tongue some errors, misspellings and strange sentence assembly might occur. Well, enough talk, let's get on with the real thing. 




What kind of computer systems are relevant in this context? 



Since this document will be part of several texts related to the OS I'm still developing, information herein applies to the IBM PC architecture. 




General addressing issues 



In a PC computer system's processor, the smallest addressable or manipulative unit is bit. A bit can have one of two possible values 0 or 1. In computer memory the smallest addressable unit is a byte. On harddisks conforming to the ATA standard (ATA-1 and above) the smallest addressable unit is a sector. Each sector is made up of 512 bytes. Floppies can use different sector sizes, but an IBM formatted PC diskette will always use a sector size of 512 bytes. When it comes to SCSI I'm not sure what the specs says, but I assume that 512 byte is true for SCSI harddisks. 



I will assume that when talking about harddisks and "harddisk-like" mediums, sectors are 512 bytes. Several examples can prove this to be a safe assumption. ATA drivers and BIOS's will "always" have a hardcoded x86 REP INSW instruction to read 512 bytes. The sectors are spread around on the medium, and the electronics on the "drive" will take care of finding them. 




Physical addressing issues 



The physical organization of sectors on the medium is not of concern to the high level of the operating system. The OS will see the disk as a linear stream of sectors. Each sector will be addressed using a number starting from zero. This is in harddisk terminology known as a LBA-addressing - Logical Block Addressing. There is a different scheme called CHS-addressing, which has its origin from the physical layout inside harddisk. 



Briefly, harddisks consists of one or more rotating platters. A read-write head is positioned above the rotating surface and is able to read or write the data underneath the current head position. The position of the head determines which track is being read. The term track can be compared to the tracks on LP's. These tracks are again divided into sectors - the famous 512-byte units and the "S" is CHS. As you know a sector is shaped like a slice from a cake (silly thing to compare with), but in the harddisk world, a sector is the part of a slice that lies within a track. If you're totally unfamiliar with this stuff... this may sound pretty dull. 



There is another term called cylinder(s) - the C in CHS. A cylinder is almost the same as a track, except that it means all tracks lining up under each other on all the surfaces. The final letter - H - stands for Head(s). This is equivalent to side(s). It simply means one of the rotating platters or one of the sides on one of the platters. If a harddisk has three rotating platters, it usually has 5 or 6 readable sides, each with their own read-write head.



<Ðèñóíîê: hd.gif (14383 bytes)>




CHS-LBA address translation 



Modern ATA harddrives are able to present the "geometry" or "addressing scheme" of the drive in two ways - CHS or LBA. CHS is what I've been trying to explain in the section above. LBA is the most attractive scheme, because it maps directly to the way a filesystem would view the medium. Since CHS existed "long" before LBA on ATA drives, there are different ways of translating a CHS address to an LBA address. As time has passed by, harddisk manufacturers and software developers have come to an agreement on this. 



I will try to explain why this translation is or was a problem in a short way. If you are looking for a more detailed explanation, read the documents on this subject written by Hale Landis. The ATA-1 specification is the real name for the type of drives sometimes known as IDE drives. These drives support 1024 cylinders, 16 heads and 63 sectors. When the IBM PC began to support these drives, the programming interface to the harddisks, INT13, was designed to support only these parameters. The following x86 CPU registers where used to specify the address: 



CH equals the low 8 bits of 10-bit cylinder number (10 bits are needed for specifying 1024 values). CL[6-7] equals the high 2 bits of the 10-bit cylinder number (stored in bits 6 & 7 of CL). CL[0-5] equals the 6-bit sector number (1-based 1..63). DH equals the head number (only bits 0-3 was used with IDE, because the 16 head limit in the ATA head I/O register). 



When harddisks became bigger (with ATA-2, Enhanced IDE), what happened was that the number of cylinders were increased to more than 1024. Since the INT13 interface could not specify more than 1024 cylinders, the BIOS programmers came up with different solutions (unfortunately). One of the solutions was to simulate more heads. This was done to keep the cylinder number below (or equal to) 1024. This was an OK solution because the DL register had 4 unused bits. 



Solution number two was to put the upper bits of the cylinder number (bits above the 10th bit) into the upper nibble of DL. This would also have been a nice solution (in fact even better than the first one, for a programmer's point of view, since the geometry would have been intact). 

Solution number two would have given a 14-bit cylinder number (16384 cylinders). SO, what is the problem?? you would say... The problem is that the many BIOS manufacturers implemented the method they liked best and never agreed on a way for programs to detect which method they used. 



With ATA-2, LBA came to IDE harddisks (in fact they were now called EIDE, Enhanced IDE). The "enhancement" consisted among other things of expanded cylinder capacity (more than 1024 cylinders) and the LBA feature. Some of the bad BIOS manufacturers decided to use the LBA addressing feature and then translate the LBA address into a INT13 CHS geometry of their own. Again, nobody could agree upon which way to calculate the proper CHS values. The result was two new types of addresses. 



In order to properly convert the INT13 "emulated" address into a proper hardware-compatible CHS address, one needs to know the "sector" and "head" values used when calculating the INT13 CHS address. The Disk Parameter Table (DPT) and later the Enhanced Disk Parameter Table (EDPT) will give you all the necessary information, but the BIOS manufacturers did not agree upon this at first either.



Nowadays (1999), we have the so called INT13 extensions which was created by Microsoft/IBM (and later enhanced by Phoenix Technologies, Ltd). With this new and now widely supported interface, disk addressing is done with a 64-bit LBA address. The LBA addresses used by these extensions, are compatible with the CHS addresses presented by the older INT13 functions when using the below translation algorithm. 



The final thing I have to say about CHS-LBA translation is that the "official" or "correct" way to perform it, is by following the sector to the end of a track, then advancing to the first sector on the next head on the same cylinder and finally advancing to the next cylinder after leaving the last head... confusing??? There reason for this order was originally to minimize the "sideways" head movement time, also known as the "seek-time". The algorithm here is the same as the one used inside the electronics of the IDE controller. 



Here it is (Example #0001): 



HPC = the number of heads (per cylinder, or the number of read-write heads). 
SPT = the number of sectors (per track/side) 



LBA = (((Cylinder * HPC) + Head) * SPT) + Sector - 1 



To reverse this algorithm, that is, to find out the CHS address equal to an LBA address, is a bit more complex. The most important thing is that the HPC and SPT parameters most be the exact same as above (Example #0002): 



1. Sector = (LBA mod SPT) + 1 
2. Head = (LBA / SPT) mod HPC
3. Cylinder = (LBA / SPT) / HPC 



The "mod" means modulo, which is the remainder after the equivalent division. If you keep reading you'll find examples on how these algorithms are implemented in assembly language.




INT13 - Software Interrupt 13H



I've mentioned INT13 several places in this text. INT13 is the disk interface used by operating systems to access harddisks and diskette drives. Originally the IBM PCs did not have harddisks and INT13 only handed diskette drives. When harddisks arrived the new code moved the diskette handler to INT 40h. The new INT13 included code to check for drive identifiers between 0 and 127, and pass control to INT40 if that was the case. This code can be found in most BIOS's even today. 

In many cases the same source code is used today decades later for compatibility, inability and laziness reasons. I won't mention names but the company has been mentioned in this text.



With INT13-harddisks the sector size is always 512 bytes, this is a safe assumption. Correct me if I'm wrong. I will give you a short guide to how INT13 harddisk access is done. I assume you're familiar with the x86 CPU architecture and know what registers are. Alright here we go:




READ SECTOR(S)



AH = 02h (function number).
AL = number of sectors to read (1..255, I'm not sure whether 0 means 256 with INT13).
CH = cylinder bits 0-7 (LSB of the 10-bit cylinder number, 0-1023).
CL = cylinder bits 8-9 (in bits 6-7 of CL).
CL = sector number (in bits 0-5 of CL, 1-63, CHS sector numbers are one-based)
DL = drive number (80h-FFh for harddisks, 128-255 decimal).
DH = head number (originally 0-15, with translation it can be 0-255).
ES:BX = segment:offset pointer to buffer (this is real-mode).



Notes: 



Some BIOS implementations might not allow you to do a full 255/256 sector read. To be on the safe side, try to avoid requests the cross a track boundary.



From diskette drives you must ensure that a read request does not cross a DMA page (64K aligned address) boundary. It is highly unlikely that the BIOS will take care of this problem for you. The easiest way of taking care of this is to simply ensure that the buffer address you're using is always aligned on a boundary equal to the request size. I you're reading four 512-byte sectors, align the buffer on a 2KB boundary.




WRITE SECTOR(S)



AH = 03h (guess what, function number for write).



The rest of the parameters are exactly the same as for READ SECTORS. I'm sure you understand that you must fill the buffer pointed to by ES:BX with the data you want to write. ;)




GET DRIVE PARAMETERS



AH = 08h (function number for get drive params).
DL = drive number (same as with READ/WRITE SECTORS).



This function will return with CF=0 if the drive is valid. I've read somewhere that not all BIOS's correctly sets/clear CF. When you attempt to detect the installed harddisks, you could check the number of attached drives returned in DL, when you've checked the first disk with DL=80h.



This function returns the "maximum" CHS parameters in the same registers as they are passed to INT13 in,  with functions 02h and 03h.



CH[0-7] and CL[6-7] returns the maximum cylinder value, not count! (less or equal to 1023).
CL[0-5] maximum sector number, since sector numbers are one-based this is also count of sectors.
DH returns the maximum head number (0-255, again, this is the number of heads - 1).



Notes:



It is common to exclude the last cylinder from the information returned by this functions. On IBM PCs this cylinder used to be reserved as a "manufacturer diagnostics cylinder". If you're writing an OS or a partitioning utility, you might want to leave it as an option to the user to include this cylinder in a partition. Make sure your utility does a read/write/verify on the cylinder before attempting to use it. 




INT13 EXTENSIONS INSTALL CHECK



AH = 41h
DL = drive number (same as with READ/WRITE SECTORS).
BX = 55AAh



Returns:



BX = AA55h (byte-swapped) and CF=0 if the extensions are supported for the drive.

This calls also returns information about the supported sub-functions in CX. Please refer to Ralf Browns excellent Interrupt List for details on all these functions.




EXTENDED READ SECTOR(S)



AH = 42h
DL = drive number (same as with READ/WRITE SECTORS).
DS:SI = pointer to disk request packet structure.



Request packet format:

BYTEPacket Length (10h)BYTEReserved (00h)WORDSector CountWORDBuffer OffsetWORDBuffer SegmentQWORD64-bit Logical Block Address


EXTENDED WRITE SECTOR(S)



AH = 43h
DL = drive number (same as with READ/WRITE SECTORS).
DS:SI = pointer to disk request packet structure (same as above again).




EXTENDED GET DRIVE PARAMETERS



AH = 48h
DL = drive number (same as with READ/WRITE SECTORS).
DS:SI = buffer for drive parameter structure.



Structure layout:

WORDBuffer Size, 1Ah, 1Eh or 42h, depending on the version of the extensions.WORDInformation FlagsDWORD# of Physical CylindersDWORD# of Physical HeadsDWORD# of Physical SectorsQWORD64-bit Total number of sectors on drive.


Notes:



The table above describes the returned values for a version 1.0 call. I have not verified if you can force only the information you want to be returned by setting the buffer size field to the proper size (such as 1Ah to return just the above), but I hope this is the case (for the sake of compatibility).



Again, get Ralf Browns Interrupt List, which has a very detailed explanation of all this stuff. You can find the latest version of the list by doing a search for "Ralf Brown Files" in http://www.altavista.com or any other decent search engine.




INT13 example code



If the INT13 stuff was not easy to understand, here are some x86 assembly code examples on how to read sectors from the first harddisk using the standard calls. The first example is a plain example on how to read the Master Boot Record, while the second example demonstrates how to read a sector specified by an LBA address. The proper code to get the driver parameters is also included. Have fun.



READMBR.ASM
READLBA.ASM



I tested these two examples in my debugger and both the 8086 and 386 version gave the same result. This makes me pretty darn sure that my "split division" algorithm work as it's supposed to. You'll probably want to rearrange and optimize the code, but it should be good enough to give you an idea of how it can be done.



Both files assemble into DOS executables. They don't output anything, so in order to really understand what's going on - run them in a debugger and single-step through them. This way you'll see what each of the instructions do.




Harddisks and Partitions



When talking about harddisks as they are used in PC systems, an important issue is partitioning. When IBM started using harddisks they had this idea that people would want to use several operating systems at the same time. Well, not at the exact same time, but one on Monday, maybe Tuesday too, but on Wednesday they would want to use another operating system.



With this in mind, they decided to set aside a small area in the very first sector on disk, CHS sector 0/0/1 or LBA sector 0 if you like, for a "Partition Table".



Even though CHS addressing was the only addressing method back then, they were in fact clever enough to include both CHS and LBA fields in this table. With the INT13 extensions and the 64-bit LBAs we would soon need another partition table layout. Please have look at a text I wrote -- EMBR -- about a new potential partition scheme.



There are four entries in the table, each of them specifies the starting and ending location of a partition. One of the two LBA fields specifies the starting location, while the other specifies the number of consecutive sectors in the partitions.



Before further explaining how the partition table works, I'll "draw" and example table. This example will cover a 1GB drive, and it will have the following parameters:



520 Cylinders
64 Heads
63 Sectors



With the above parameters, the physical number of cylinder (in the current drive translation mode), would probably have been 2080 since the maximum head is really 16 (16 * 4 = 64). For compatibility with INT13, most ATA-2 drives, will have a default CHS translation where Sectors per Track does not exceed 63, even though all drives allow 255 to be the maximum. 



Back to the partition table again... I'll list the fields in the order in which they appear in the table, with some exceptions, just to make the CHS fields appear in the C, H, S order. This example has just one BIGDOS partition, but it does not use the entire disk space. I'll show you how to find out the amount of unused space. The numbers are decimal but they all have leading zeroes, just to make fit better.



+B+ System +--- CHS Start ---+---- CHS End ---+- Start --+- Count --+
|-|--------|-----------------|----------------|----------|----------+
|Y| BIGDOS | 0000 | 001 | 01 | 0259 | 063 |63 | 00000063 | 01048257 |
|n| unused | 0000 | 000 | 00 | 0000 | 000 |00 | 00000000 | 00000000 |
|n| unused | 0000 | 000 | 00 | 0000 | 000 |00 | 00000000 | 00000000 |
|n| unused | 0000 | 000 | 00 | 0000 | 000 |00 | 00000000 | 00000000 |
+-+--------+------+-----+----+------+-----+---+----------+----------+





What does this information mean? This information tells you that the disk has one partition, the partition is bootable, it is a BIGDOS partition (BIGDOS partitions will be explained later). You also get to know where the partition starts and where it ends.



"B" is the "bootable" or "active" field. This field corresponds to BYTE 0 in the partition table entry. A value of 00H indicates a non-active partition and a value of 80H indicates the active partition. Only one partition at a time can be bootable. If you set more than one entry to "active" the small master boot program will complain. The master boot program will also use this field as the drive number during boot.



"System" is used to indicate what type of  FS the partition contains or which OS the partition belongs to. A value of 00H will indicate that the entry is unused. Normally unused entries will have all the fields set to zero, but the "system" field is the only field strictly necessary to check. The "system" field corresponds to BYTE 4 in the partition table entry.



"CHS Start" is the CHS address of the first sector in the partition. It is made up of three numbers. Cylinder is a 10-bit number (four digits, BYTE 2 and 3), Head is 8-bit (three digits, BYTE 1) and Sector is 6-bit (2 digits, BYTE 2). 10 + 8 + 6 = 24 bits.



"CHS End"  is the CHS address of the last sector in the partition. It is also made up of the three above numbers. Cylinder (BYTE 6 and 7), Head (BYTE 5) and Sector (BYTE 6).



"Start" is a 32-bit starting LBA sector number. It is calculated in the standard way:



Start = ((StartC * HeadsPerCylinder) + StartH) * SectorsPerTrack) + StartS - 1



"Count" is also a 32-bit field, which tells you how many sectors the partition uses. This field can be calculated using two major algorithms:



Count = (((EndC - StartC) * HeadsPerCylinder) + (EndH - StartH)) * SectorsPerTrack + (EndS - StartS).



On the above calculation, you don't subtract 1 at the end, because we want the "count of sectors", and not the zero-based LBA address of the last sector, see? There is another method too, the idea is the same, but it calculates the mentioned "last LBA sector" and subtracts the "start" field afterwards:



Count = (((EndC * HeadsPerCylinder) + EndH) * SectorsPerTrack + EndS - 1) - Start




Master Boot Record



When I talked about the Partition Table in the previous section, I said that IBM sat aside space for it in the first sector on the harddisk - CHS sector 0/0/1 or LBA 0. This sector does not only contain the Partition Table, but also executable code. The entire sector is known as the MBR - Master Boot Record. This sector is loaded and executed by the BIOS when booting from the harddisk. This small master boot program will check the embedded Partition Table for an entry marked as "active". This program will then load the first sector (the Boot Sector) of the partition marked "active" into memory and execute it.



This booting process is pretty complex, but I'll try to explain what the master boot program does in step-by-step manner. When the "boot sector" is given control, it will finish the boot process. The boot sector is equivalent the the first sector on diskettes (which have no MBR).



 

1.BIOS reads CHS sector 0/0/1 of the first available boot device, in this case the first harddisk.2.The sector is read into a fixed memory location - 0000:7C00, and control is transferred there.3.The master boot program will relocate itself into low memory, in order to allow the boot sector of the active partition to be loaded at 0000:7C00 too.4.The master boot program jumps to the next instruction in the new location - typically 0000:06nn or 0060:nnnn.5.The master boot program will the check all four "Partition Table" entries for a partition marked as "active", by checking for value 80h.6.If none are marked active, the master boot program (depending on who wrote it of course) inform the user that none of the partitions are "active" or execute ROM BASIC - perform an INT18, which in these modern days usually results in booting from another device.7.The master boot record installed by DOS' FDISK will require the "active" field to be 00h or 80h, any other value will cause an "Invalid partition table" message. Most BIOS implementations pass the drive number to the MBR in DL.8.The first CHS sector of the "active" partition (as specified in "Start CHS") will be loaded at 0000:7C00, just like the MBR.  Control is then transferred there with a JMP to 0000:7C00.

If you would like to see a generic master boot program, you can get MBR.ASM. This small example program will assemble and link into an EXE file.  When the executable is run, it will replace the current master boot program with itself, but preserve the partition table. This master boot program will allow booting from harddisks other than the first one. Instead of requiring an "active" value of 80h it will accept any values between 80h and FFh - that's the way it should have been all along...

This example boot program does not print any messages, but it works. I tested it successfully on my system last year, and it used to be the master boot program I used back then. The code is not optimized for size, but yet it's only 64 bytes long. Take care and have fun!




Introduction to Boot Sectors and OS marketing



As a part of the OS I'm constantly developing, I've written a new suite of Boot Sectors for the FAT file system. These boot sectors support loading plain binaries and "MZ" executables of virtually any size (in good old 16-bit DOS terminology). Please download my latest OS tree -- OS.ZIP -- to get hold of the boot sector source code.



 



Thomas Kjoernes -- "The Bass Demon"




 

