WHY?  A readily available comprehensive EGA/VGA font collection is in
the interest of us all.  I am always in a search for more fonts to add
to it.  In particular, I am looking for DOS Code Page fonts supplied
with various countries national supplement package.  I currently have
the Code Page fonts for all the standard code pages + code page 862
(Hebrew).  I am especially interested in getting the code page fonts
for modern Greek and Arabic.

DOS CODE PAGES: If you have access to a DOS national supplement
for any country or a language which is not included in the current
collection, you can help.  Here is what you should do.  Feel free to
contact me if you have further questions or need more assistance.

	1.  Look for a file called EGA.CPI. the fonts are usually
	contained in a file named EGA.CPI which is included with the
	DOS (Version 3.3 or higher) distribution.  Do NOT send me
	this file, since distributing it constitutes a violation of
	DOS copyright.

	2.  Instead, use the program BREAKCPI.COM, which is included
	in the my font utilities, to break the EGA.CPI file into fonts.

	2'.  Yet another method to create the fonts is to use DOS
	commands (as described in the manual) to load the font(s)
	and then use the DUMPFONT.COM program included with the font
	utilities to extract the font and dump it into files.  If you
	choose to do so, please note that each code page screen font
	comes in 3 different sizes: 16x8 (for VGA), 14x8 (for EGA)
	and 8x8 (for 43/50 lines on EGA/VGA).

	3.  Make an archive all these font files.  Uuencode the archive
	and mail it to me.  I prefer ZIP format, but I should be able
	to handle with minimal effort other archival formats.

I will use your contribution in the next edition of the collection
and gratefully acknowledge your help.

IS THIS LEGAL?  Yes, it is.  Fonts cannot be copyrighted.  Only
the programs that generate them can be copyrighted.  Refer to the
discussions in the "legal" newgroups for details.

OTHER FONTS: I am also looking for other EGA/VGA text mode fonts as
well.  If you have access to such a fonts, you can help.  Please take
a moment to check if the font is currently included in the collection
(I may have used a different name for it).  If it is and you know
the origin of the font, please let me know, since I have lost most
of this information.  If it not in the collection, I would appreciate
getting the font and if possible include credit to its creator.

FONTS INCLUDED IN PD/SHAREWARE PROGRAMS: If you find a font included
in a PD/SHAREWARE program, please mail the program to me.  I will
extract the font out and erase the program.

FONTS INCLUDED IN OTHER PROGRAMS: Please do not send me the program as
you may be violating its copyright.  Instead try to use DUMPFONT.COM
to extract the font.  If this doesn't work, contact me, and I will
help you to extract the font from the program without violating its
copyright.



 
