Hoi Menno,

Hier een docje dat ik al een tijdje heb over het programmeren van een DAC
Het komt uit een boek, de naam weet ik niet meer. Ik hoop dat je er wat
aan hebt.

Wim - wim@dutmpw1.tudelft.nl

---Cut Here -----------------------------------------------------------------

Video Digital-to-Analog Converter (Video DAC)

The video digital-to-analog converter (DAC) integrates the function of a color
look-up table with three internal DACs for driving an analog display.

The size of the color look-up table is 256 by 18 bits to allow the display of
256 colors from a palette of 256K possible colors. Each RGB analog output is
driven by a 6-bit DAC. Each register in the color look-up table contains 6
bits each for the red, green, and blue DACs .

Video Digital to Analog Converter (DAC) Addresses In Hex

PEL Address (Write mode)  RW 03C8
PEL Address (Read mode)   WO 03C7
DAC State Register        RO 03C7
PEL Data Register         RW 03C9
PEL Mask                  RW 03C6  *)

RO = Read Only, RW = Read / Write, WO = Write Only.

*) This register must not be written to by application code or destruction
of the color look-up table may occur.
See also "Video DAC Programming Considerations" on page 4-117.

Device Operation

The PEL address inputs (PO - P7) and the blanking input are sampled on the
rising edge of the PEL clock. After three further rising edges of the PEL
clock, the analog outputs reflect the state of these inputs.

During normal operation the PEL address inputs (PO - P7) are used as a pointer
to one of the 256 internal registers (color look-up table). The value in each
register is then, in turn, converted to an analog signal for each of the three
analog outputs (red, green, blue). The blanking input can also be used to
force the analog outputs to O volts. The blanking operation is independent of
the state of the PEL address inputs.

I/0 Controllers, Video DAC 4-115
During system microprocessor accesses, the 8-bit PEL Address register acts as
a pointer to the 256 internal registers. Each internal register is 18 bits
wide; 6 bits each for red, green, and blue. The internal registers are
accessible through the system microprocessor interface as described below.

The system microprocessor interface is asynchronous with the video path. The
timing of this interface is controlled by the 'write enable' and 'read enable'
signals.

Video DAC/System Microprocessor Interface

The PEL Address register holds an 8-bit value that is used to address a
location within the color look-up table. The PEL Address register may be
written to at two different addresses to establish a read or write mode
respectively. Once the PEL Address register has been written to and an access
has been made to a location in the color-look up table, the PEL Address
register automatically increments and further accesses may occur to successive
locations.

Each time the PEL Address register is written to at address hex 03C8 it
identifies that a write sequence will occur. A write sequence consists of
three successive byte writes to the Data register at address hex 03C9. The
least-significant 6 bits of each byte are concatenated to form the value
placed in the 18-bit Data register. The order is red byte first, then green,
and finally blue. Once the third byte has been written, the value in the Data
register is written to the location pointed to by the PEL Address register.
The order of events for a write cycle is:

1. Write to the PEL Address register at hex 03C8.

2. Three bytes are written to the Data register at hex 03C9.

3. The contents of the Data register are transferred to the location in the
   color look-up table pointed to by the PEL Address register.

4. The PEL Address register auto-increments by 1.

5. Go to step 2.

Each time the PEL Address register is written to at address hex 03C7 it
identifies that a read sequence will occur. A read sequence consists of three
successive byte reads from the Data register at address hex 03C9. The least
significant 6 bits of each byte taken from the Data register contain the
corresponding color value. The order is red byte first, then green, and
finally blue. The order of events for a read cycle is:

1. Write to the PEL Address register at hex 03C7.

2. The contents of the location in the color look-up table pointed to by the
   PEL Address register are transferred to the Data register.

3. The PEL Address register auto-increments by one.

4. Three bytes are read back from the Data register at hex 03C9.

5. Goto step 2.

If the PEL Address register is written to during either a read or write
cycle, a mode is initialized and the unfinished cycle is aborted. The
effects of writing to the Data register during a read cycle or reading
from the Data register during a write cycle are undefined and may
change the look-up table contents.

A read from address hex 03C7 returns O's in bit positions O and 1, if
the DAC is currently in a read mode. A read from address hex 03C7
returns ones in bit positions O and 1, if the DAC is currently in a write
mode.

Reads from the PEL Address register at hex 03C8 or the State
register at hex 03C7 do not interfere with read or write cycles and
may take place at any time.

Video DAC Programming Considerations

1. As explained in "Video DAC/System Microprocessor Interface" on page 4-116,
the effects of writing to the Data register during a read cycle or reading
from the Data register during a write cycle are undefined and may change the
look-up table contents. Therefore, the following sequence must be followed
to ensure the color look-up table integrity during accesses to it:

a. Write out address to the PEL Address register

b. Disable Interrupts

c. Write or read three bytes of data

d. Go to step C. Repeat this step for the desired number of locations.

e. Enable interrupts.

Note: The above sequence assumes that any interrupting process will return
the DAC in the correct mode (write or read). If this is not the case, the
sequence shown below should be followed:

a. Disable interrupts

b. Write out address to PEL Address register

c. Write or read three bytes of data

d. Go to step b. Repeat this step for the desired number of locations.

e. Enable interrupts.

2. There is a timing requirement on the minimum amount of time that must
separate the trailing edge of one Read or Write command to the DAC and the
leading edge of the next Read or Write command. The minimum separation is
240 nanoseconds. Software must ensure that the 240-nanosecond separation
exists between two successive accesses to the DAC. Assembly language programs
can meet this requirement by placing a JMP instruction between successive
accesses to the DAC.

3. To prevent "snow" on the screen, an application reading data from or
writing data to the DAC's Data register should ensure that the BLANK input
to the DAC is asserted. This can be accomplished either by restricting data
transfers to retrace intervals (use Input Status register 1 to determine when
retrace is occurring) or by using the Screen Off bit located in the Clocking
Mode register of the Sequencer subsection.

Note: BIOS provides read and write interfaces to the Video DAC.

4. The Mask register (address hex 03C6) must not be written to by application
code, or destruction of the color look-up table may result. This register is
correctly initialized to hex FF by BIOS during a video mode set.
